blog: How Not to Break a Search Engine (#3446)
sourcegraph/about: blogposts/2021/how-to-not-break-a-search-engine-or-what-i-learned-about-unglamorous-engineering.md

well for migrating other systems that accept user input.

### Part 1: Unit testing

Unit testing was the obvious thing to do™ and familiar territory for a lot of
developers, so I won't belabor this part. I thought of this as my frontline
defense for testing correctness. I reused some of our existing parser tests
(which served as a rough specification of things to get right) and also added a
lot of additional tests for new parts of the syntax. You bet there's test
coverage.

<img src="https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/about.sourcegraph.com/blog/2021/parser-coverage.png" style="width: 300px">

### Part 2: Integration testing

Once I wrote a feature-flagged code path to use the new parser, it was time to
test whether Sourcegraph behaved functionally similar. Integration tests ran a
search query through a running instance of the Sourcegraph application and
checked whether search results were expected. This testing phase was so
important because the parser produced a new and different internal
representation. I'd abstracted out a common interface for our backend to access
the new data structure under the feature-flagged code path to test on.

> <img src="https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/about.sourcegraph.com/blog/2021/integration.png" style="width: 800px">

Reviewer: @rvantonder Forgot to mention – I don't think every image needs a caption, but for ones like this that show a bit more detail, I think it's helpful to add one briefly describing what the image is showing. Some people will skim the blog post and being able to see easily what the image is about can help to draw them in. You can see some examples here: https://about.sourcegraph.com/blog/optimizing-a-code-intel-commit-graph/

Author: done. also added `alt` to all imgs

> <img src="https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/about.sourcegraph.com/blog/2021/integration.png" style="width: 800px">

Reviewer 2: Out of personal curiosity, what did you use to generate the diagram?

Author: https://excalidraw.com/. I like draw.io a lot excalidraw is just faster/easier sometimes

cost can feel very personal.

The lamentable part of the unglamorous engineer's work is that there's little
account of these feats. Technical media and blogs are prone to talk about
features or intellectual explorations. The new and shiny is naturally engaging.
But I also want to hear about that impressive engineering feat that no one
noticed. The one where a developer or team pulled off some tectonic shift in a
codebase, everyone oblivious except themselves. 

## New capabilities while steadily transitioning the old

Sourcegraph supports more combinations of operators now. And nothing outright
broke in order to get there. And to be clear, I did more than rewriting and
testing parsers in that six-month time frame. There were frequent updates in
releases that customers could enable along the way, with a safe fallback to
disable new functionality. I also enabled new implementations on our dogfood
instance as things matured. The core implementation probably took only two or
three months, but crossing the point of no return and removing the fallback was
a slow and thorough process. There's more to tweak, but when the previous code
was finally dropped, it felt good and it felt right.

> ## Developer tools reduce unglamorous effort

Author: It's funny, a Sourcegraph call out isn't actually something that I feel compelled to do, but more like I realized along the way that dev tools actually have this role in bringing value.  Will rework this or just outright remove it if it doesn't work.

> ## Developer tools reduce unglamorous effort

Author: I just nuked it, don't see a good way to fit it in. Adding a good concrete example doubles down on "oh yeah this is hella relevant see" and could still come across as superficial maybe. I tried a footnote but it seems like a distracting thought in context. Maybe something a fun tweet could hint at, but just going to leave it out of the blog post itself since I can see how it detracts from the other points.

While building the new parser I ran countless searches and constantly jumped
around the codebase to figure out how things interacted. It made me realize
that developer tools like code search are really just empowering me to do
unglamorous engineering more effectively. That's a very, very good thing. Of
course tools like code search aren't exclusive to humdrum work, but I wonder
how much value developers ultimately derive from tools that reduce unglamorous
effort. I bet it's substantial. Refactoring and rewriting, searching for
dependency versions and updating them—this _is_ the stuff of unglamorous
engineering. But maybe because the nature of the work is so unseen, so is the
value behind the developer tools that power it.

> ## In closing: Unglamorous engineering and you

Author: Added a sentence about this where I think it makes sense to mention in context, (`ctrl-f hindsight to find it`)

things—conceptually big costs that I wanted to avoid. All of these
considerations, code changes, and heaps of testing happened in the pursuit of
an unglamorous outcome while two, maybe three, engineers reviewed the code to
see it play out. I know this isn't an isolated thing. I get faint hints of
other engineers at Sourcegraph doing momentous but unglamorous things that most
of the organization is blissfully unaware of. And the Twitterverse suggests
there's more of it happening in software all around us:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet tw-align-center"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">A huge problem in software companies is that large new features get praise, promotions, accolades... while migrating off a legacy system, increasing performance 2,4,10X, or reducing error rates, pages, or alerts by X% is often only recognized by peers and not leadership.</p>&mdash; Dan Mayer (@danmayer) <a href="https://twitter.com/danmayer/status/1395564252308541440?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 21, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I empathize with the engineers who don't have an audience for their unglamorous

> work, who want to say "I did A Thing, there's nothing to see, but more people

Reviewer: ```suggestion
work, who want to say, "I did A Thing, there's nothing to see, but more people
```

---
title: "How not to break a search engine or: What I learned about unglamorous engineering"

> description: "When we switched to a new search query parser in September 2020, you'd never know that
> anything had changed. This is an account of the invisible, rigorous testing that
> happened behind the scenes to ensure a seamless transition."

Author: ```suggestion
description: "When we switched to a new search query parser in September 2020, you'd never know that
anything had changed. This is an account of the unglamorous engineering that
happened behind the scenes to ensure a seamless transition."
```

Since "behind the scenes" implies "invisible" I played with this idea but don't think it's as nice. I think it's good that the short description has a topic of 'testing', and the rest of the article will deal with the unglamorous stuff well enough so, yeah, this was an idea but I'm happy as it is.

Reviewer: @rvantonder You are totally right about invisible + behind the scenes being tautological though, I'm going to tweak it!

### Part 2: Integration testing

Once I wrote a feature-flagged code path to use the new parser, it was time to
test whether Sourcegraph behaved functionally similar. Integration tests ran a
search query through a running instance of the Sourcegraph application and
checked whether search results were expected. This testing phase was so
important because the parser produced a new and different internal
representation. I'd abstracted out a common interface for our backend to access
the new data structure under the feature-flagged code path to test on.

<figure style="width: 800px; margin: auto;">
  <img src="https://storage.googleapis.com/sourcegraph-assets/about.sourcegraph.com/blog/2021/integration.png" alt="Integration testing diagram">
  <a id="fig-1"><figcaption>
  <i>Fig. 1: Integration testing abstracts a common interface for our backend
  to access query values.
  We test that the backend produces the same search results for
  simple queries (ones that don't have, e.g., </i>
  <code>or</code>
  <i>-operators), irrespective of whether those values originate from the existing parser's output or the new one.</i></figcaption></a>

> </figure>

Reviewer: @rvantonder This isn't a blocking question, but I don't think we need to call this "Fig 1" as there are no further images labelled "Fig". 

Also, the drop shadow is great for screengrabs, but on diagrams with a white background it looks jarring to me to have the shadow break up the background of the image + the rest of the post unnecessarily. I can't see what is creating the drop shadow myself to remove it. If it's a pain to change we can just leave as is!

Author: The Fig label is left over some something I tried and reverted. We should remove :-)

The backdrop is I think a default gatsby CSS thing. I think we'd need to add a custom style attr to get rid of the backdrop. Agree it would look better without it, but would need some hacking.

engineering, don't get me wrong. But shouldn't doing the necessary, unglamorous
work be a marketable skill as well? Where's the signage that reads "Unglamorous
engineers wanted. Will pay handsomely"? I hope you're encouraged to share what
you've pulled off.

---

<a id="footnote-1"><sup>1</sup><small>If you've been following along, here's
where our three-course meal analogy breaks down. Let's just say
differential testing is the surprise food inspector hanging out in the
kitchen.</small></a>

<a id="footnote-2"><sup>2</sup><small>Amusingly, I once met an engineer from a
well-known tech company who used this title on their business card.</small></a>

---

**About the author**

[Rijnard](https://twitter.com/rvtond) is interested in developing new ways to
search, manipulate, and fix code.  He holds a PhD in Computer Science from
Carnegie Mellon University, where he researched automated bug fixing. He enjoys
fundamental research but also wants to make research ideas a reality in
practice. That's why he currently works at Sourcegraph, where he applies his
research background to develop new tools and techniques for large-scale code
search and automated refactoring.

> <small>Acks: Thanks [Rebecca Dodd](/company/team#rebecca-dodd-she-her) and [Camden Cheek](https://twitter.com/camdendcheek) for feedback on the content of this post.</small>

Author: @rebeccadee @camdencheek please check you are OK with this and if so, that links point to where you prefer :-)

Reviewer 2: Looks great -- thanks! 😄

---

> title: "How not to break a search engine or: What I learned about unglamorous engineering"

Reviewer: Made title sentence case https://about.sourcegraph.com/handbook/communication/content_guidelines/style_and_mechanics#capitalization

> description: "When we switched to a new search query parser in September 2020, you'd never know that

Reviewer: Took a stab at this so we have a custom summary for the blog homepage and when the post is shared on social. Feel free to edit

[@joe](https://twitter.com/jc_unknwon) brought this testing to our CI. It was a
game changer. Now all of our development was subject to this testing, not just
my local tinkering. I'd venture that this is probably the most valuable part of

> our search testing infrastructure today. The wild thing is how rock solid it

Reviewer: Crazy is considered non-inclusive language so I've swapped this out, feel free to use another word if you prefer

Hardly anyone could appreciate how months of effort culminated in an
incident-free transition. That was, after all, expected. I mean, how do you
derive appreciation from users, peers, or managers when the point was for no
one to notice anything significant had changed; when there's no perceptible
delta?

## Value in the unseen and unspoken

There's unglamorous engineering in the software all around us. For all
its lack of recognition, I wish we grasped its value a bit better. I'm reminded
of a tweet by a former colleague who researched donations for open source
projects:

> <blockquote class="twitter-tweet tw-align-center" data-conversation="none"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">I can tell you from some informal interviews we did outside that paper, that people spend the money on gruntwork — the stuff that’s fun they’re more likely to do anyway, money or not.</p>&mdash; Bogdan Vasilescu (@b_vasilescu) <a href="https://twitter.com/b_vasilescu/status/1279199236094132227?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">July 3, 2020</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Reviewer: Apologies if you used the original formatting for a reason, but I like how the blockquotes break up the post visually and show the profile pic of the author (studies have shown people like to see faces!)

Author: nope this is goood

Author: ah yeah this embed is perfect that's what I had in mind originally, thanks for the touch

While building the new parser I ran countless searches and constantly jumped
around the codebase to figure out how things interacted. It made me realize
that developer tools like code search are really just empowering me to do
unglamorous engineering more effectively. That's a very, very good thing. Of
course tools like code search aren't exclusive to humdrum work, but I wonder
how much value developers ultimately derive from tools that reduce unglamorous
effort. I bet it's substantial. Refactoring and rewriting, searching for

> dependency versions and updating them—this _is_ the stuff of unglamorous

Reviewer: Should the emphasis be on "this" rather?

Author: don't feel strongly :-) taking your suggestion

Sourcegraph doing momentous but unglamorous things that most of the
organization is blissfully unaware of. And the Twitterverse suggests there's
more of it happening in software all around us:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet tw-align-center"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">A huge problem in software companies is that large new features get praise, promotions, accolades... while migrating off a legacy system, increasing performance 2,4,10X, or reducing error rates, pages, or alerts by X% is often only recognized by peers and not leadership.</p>&mdash; Dan Mayer (@danmayer) <a href="https://twitter.com/danmayer/status/1395564252308541440?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">May 21, 2021</a></blockquote> <script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

I empathize with the engineers who don't have an audience for their unglamorous
work, who want to say "I did A Thing, there's nothing to see, but more people
should care. Let me tell you about it!"  I like my portion of showpiece
engineering, don't get me wrong. But shouldn't doing the necessary, unglamorous
work be a marketable skill as well? Where's the signage that reads "Unglamorous

> engineers wanted. Will pay handsomely"? I hope you're encouraged to share what

Reviewer: Look. Punctuation around quotation marks is awkward and I don't think anyone has solved it yet, but I'm generally in favour of fewer punctuation marks
